SOFTWARE-5963: Document Kuantifier (#194)
osg-htc/docs: docs/other/monitor-kubernetes-kuantifier.md

1. Unpack the release blob (eg. `tar -zxvf helm-v3.0.0-linux-amd64.tar.gz`)
1. Move the `helm` binary from the archive into a location along your `$PATH` (eg. `mv linux-amd64/helm ~/.local/bin`) 

### Install Prometheus and kube-state-metrics in your Kubernetes cluster

Kuantifier relies on [Prometheus](prometheus) with [kube-state-metrics](kube-state-metrics) to account for pod resource usage. 
There are a number of ways to install both, such as via the [prometheus community helm charts](prometheus-community):

1. Add the prometheus community helm repository to your local helm 

       :::console
       helm repo add prometheus-community https://prometheus-community.github.io/helm-charts
       helm repo update

1. Install the kube-state-metrics and prometheus helm charts into your kubernetes cluster.

       :::console
       helm install kube-state-metrics prometheus-community/kube-state-metrics
       helm install prometheus prometheus-community/prometheus

       !!! note
       These commands will install into the `default` namespace by default. To install into a 
       non-default namespace such as `monitoring`, use the `-n monitoring` flag in helm install.

> 1. Ensure that the namespace where your workload pods run is properly configured.

Reviewer: I'm a little nervous about being prescriptive about installation method here: I don't really want to be on the hook for supporting Prometheus/kube-state-metrics installs directly. I think it's fine if we have light recs on installation methods like you do above, maybe elaborating that the `prometheus-community` provides Helm charts for both

Also, if we remove the first two list items, a single enumerated item looks odd so we can get rid of the enumeration.

    - Kuantifier relies on the `spec.containers[].resources.requests.cpu` field in workload pods

>       to determine processor count for GRACC reporting. Ensure a cpu request is set for pods in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      to determine processor count for GRACC reporting. Ensure a CPU request is set for pods in
```

      your workspace.
    
    - Kuantifier relies on the Prometheus pod completion time metric to calculate workload job run times.
      This metric is sometimes missed for pods that are spontaneously deleted, such as those created by
      Deployments. For best results, run workload pods via Kubernetes Jobs.

    - (Known issue) Kuantifier currently doesn't support calculating usage metrics for workload pods
      running multiple containers. Ensure that workload pods in your namespace have only one container.

Installation
------------

> Kuantifier itself is also installed via a helm chart, hosted at hub.opensciencegrid.org/iris-hep/kuantifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuantifier itself is also installed via a Helm chart, hosted on [OSG Harbor](https://hub.opensciencegrid.org)
```

### Configuring Kuantifier's Values File

Several instance-specific modifications to the default [Values File](values-file) provided with the chart 
must be made prior to installation. For full documentation of the values in the values file, see the 

> [helm chart README on Github](helm-values-readme).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Helm chart README on Github](helm-values-readme).
```

> 1. Fetch the default values.yaml for kuantifier. This file can be obtained in several ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Fetch the default values.yaml for Kuantifier. This file can be obtained in several ways.
```

I would just pick one way here and I think I lean towards the CLI

    
    - Via the [kuantifier Github repository](values-github).

          !!! note
          Ensure that the release tag for values.yaml in the git repo corresponds to the version of the chart you're installing.

1. Update the top-level `.outputFormat` in values.yaml to output records to [GRACC](https://gracc.opensciencegrid.org/)
      
       :::yaml
       outputFormat: "gratia"

1. Update the `.processor.config` map with the details of your deployment.
    - All of the following need to be set:
        - `NAMESPACE`: The namespace of the pods for which Kuantifier will collect and report metrics.

              !!! note
              Each installation of kuantifier only reports on pods in a single namespace. You must
              install multiple instances of the chart to support reporting on multiple namespaces.

        - `SITE_NAME`: The name of the site being reported.
        - `SUBMIT_HOST`: Uniquely identifying name for the Kubernetes cluster where your workload pods run, in FQDN format.
        - `VO_NAME`: Virtual Organization (VO) of jobs.

    - Additionally, the following may need to be set:

>         - `PROMETHEUS_SERVER`: The DNS name of the prometheus server installed in your kubernetes cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - `PROMETHEUS_SERVER`: The DNS name of the Prometheus server installed in your Kubernetes cluster. 
```

>             - If Prometheus was installed in your cluster via the prometheus community helm chart in the monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            - If Prometheus was installed in your cluster via the prometheus-community Helm chart in the monitoring
```

    
    - A fully configured `.processor.config` might look like:

           :::yaml
           processor:
             config:
               NAMESPACE: workload-namespace
               SITE_NAME: CHTC
               VO_NAME: University of Wisconsin
               SUBMIT_HOST: tiger-cluster.chtc.wisc.edu
               PROMETHEUS_SERVER: prometheus-server.monitoring.svc.cluster.local

1. (Optional) If Prometheus in your cluster is configured to require authentication, an
   authentication header can be specified via a key within an already-existing [Secret](kubernetes-secret) in the namespace:

       :::yaml
       processor:
         prometheus_auth:
           secret: <secret name>
           key: <key in secret containing auth header>

1. (Optional) Update the frequency of the Kuantifier Reporting job. This may be useful for debugging.

       :::yaml
       cronJob:
         schedule: "@daily"

### Installing Kuantifier

After configuring an appropriate values file for your instance, install the chart via helm:

    :::console
    helm install -f <values.yaml> -n <install namespace> kuantifier oci://hub.opensciencegrid.org/iris-hep/kuantifier

Validation
----------

> After running helm install, ensure that the expected kubernetes objects have been created. The following commands assume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running `helm install`, ensure that the expected Kubernetes objects have been created. The following commands assume
```

> that kuantifier has been installed in the monitoring namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that Kuantifier has been installed in the monitoring namespace.
```

> 1. Check that a CronJob was created for running the kuantifier processor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check that a CronJob was created for running the Kuantifier processor:
```

       :::console
       kubectl -n monitoring get cronjob kuantifier-cronjob

1. Check that a ConfigMap was created to configure processor jobs, and that the values in the ConfigMap
   align with the values set in `.processor.config` in the values file:

       :::console
       kubectl -n monitoring get configmap kuantifier-processor-config -o yaml

> If the helm chart artifacts are present as expected, run a test instance of the CronJob and inspect its output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Helm chart artifacts are present as expected, run a test instance of the CronJob and inspect its output.
```

1. Create a new job from the CronJob, then find the Pod created by the job

       :::console
       kubectl -n monitoring create job --from=cronjob/kuantifier-cronjob kuantifier-test-job
       kubectl -n monitoring get pod | grep kuantifier-test-job

> 1. Inspect the logs from the processor initContainer, which queries prometheus to generate output records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Inspect the logs from the processor initContainer, which queries Prometheus to generate output records.
```

       :::console
       kubectl -n monitoring logs <test-job-pod-name> -c processor

> 1. Inspect the logs from the gratia-output container, which sends the output records to GRACC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Inspect the logs from the `gratia-output` container, which sends the output records to GRACC.
```

       :::console
       kubectl -n monitoring logs <test-job-pod-name> -c gratia-output

> If both the processor initContainer and gratia-output container run to completion without error, the next step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If both the processor initContainer and `gratia-output` container run to completion without error, the next step
```

> is to confirm with a member of the OSG technology team that the results are visible in GRACC.

Reviewer: I think we should just point them at the https://gracc.opensciencegrid.org/d/000000079/site-summary?orgId=1&var-site=Purdue%20Geddes&var-type=Batch&var-interval=$__auto_interval_interval dashboard and have them self service this. It may take a few hours for results to show up (Ashton/Derek would know for sure)

That being said, there are lots of places where this documentation can go wrong. Please add our standard `Getting Help` section

title: Monitor Kubernetes Workloads with Kuantifier
DateReviewed: 2024-02-07

Monitoring Kubernetes Workloads with Kuantifier
===============================================

Workload jobs run via Kubernetes will not integrate with [Gratia accounting](./troubleshooting-gratia/) by default.
To report contributions to OSG made via Kubernetes, install the [Kuantifier][kuantifier-github] helm chart
on your cluster.

Before Starting
---------------

### Confirm access to a running Kubernetes cluster

All subsequent instructions assume you have access to a running Kubernetes cluster, and can run [kubectl][kubectl]

> against that cluster.

Author: Yeah, I'll update the text to reflect that.

   This metric is sometimes missed for pods that are spontaneously deleted, such as those created by
   Deployments. For best results, run workload pods via Kubernetes Jobs.

1. (Known issue) Kuantifier currently doesn't support calculating usage metrics for workload pods
   running multiple containers. Ensure that workload pods in your namespace have only one container.

Installation
------------

Kuantifier itself is also installed via a Helm chart, hosted on [OSG Harbor](https://hub.opensciencegrid.org).

### Configuring Kuantifier's Values File

Several instance-specific modifications to the default [Values File][values-file] provided with the chart 
must be made prior to installation. For full documentation of the values in the values file, see the 
[Helm chart README on Github][helm-values-readme].

1. Fetch the default values.yaml for Kuantifier. This file can be obtained in several ways.
    - Via the helm cli:

            :::console
            helm show values oci://hub.opensciencegrid.org/iris-hep/kuantifier
    
    - Via the [kuantifier Github repository][values-yaml].

        !!! note "Release Tag"

>             Ensure that the release tag for values.yaml in the git repo corresponds to the version of the chart you're installing.

Reviewer: I wouldn't even give the second one as an option
